Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Mac OS X evangelist,
Xavier Legros.
Hi everybody.
Welcome back.
Welcome to session 207,
Improving Performance with Carbon Events.
So, great.
You're all on Mac OS X now.
You have a great Carbon application.
Now, what's the next step?
We showed you this morning about
where the toolbox is going,
and we really hope that
you guys are going to take
advantage of these new features.
But there is something
that is very important.
In order to be a good and
a great Mac OS X citizen,
performance is very important.
Carbon event is a way to achieve
a great level of performance.
In this session,
we're going to talk about some of
the pitfalls and some of the concepts
that Carbon developers have been
using on Mac OS 9 that don't really
work well in this new environment.
And for that...
I'd like to introduce David McLeod,
who's not exactly the apparent slave,
but works in the toolbox team,
and will take you through some
of the main steps to make your
application a great Mac OS X citizen.
Hey, David.
Thank you.
Thanks for sticking around
after those other sessions.
Ed and Guy gave great sessions and
showed all the new features that we have,
but all those features aren't very good
unless your application is performing.
So what I'm going to try to show
you today is a few tips to use
Carbon events to get some great
performance out of your applications.
So just a quick overview of
what I'm going to talk about.
First, I'm going to cover timers and how
to use them in your application,
as opposed to doing pooling.
Then I'm going to talk about mouse
tracking and mouse tracking regions.
This is a new feature in Jaguar.
Next, I'm going to talk about
Carbon events as notifications.
It's kind of an overlooked
feature of Carbon events.
After that,
I'm going to talk about tracking loops.
What I mean by that is when you
watch the mouse for mouse down,
mouse up,
[Transcript missing]
And also right at the end,
I have a few sort of unrelated to
Carbon event tips sort of compiled based
on some feedback we got on mailing lists.
So let's get right into it.
What is a timer anyway?
I'd just like to read off the slide here,
because I wrote that one
and it's a really good,
really good definition.
A Carbon event timer is a way to
request delayed execution of code.
Now, Carbon event timers are a little
bit different than the timers you
might have been used to in OS 9.
They're not VBL tasks or
anything odd like that.
They're controlled by the event loop.
This is really important because
those other ways of doing timers,
you couldn't really call into
the toolbox because you were
accessing at interrupt time.
So because they're
controlled by the event loop,
you can call into any of
the HI toolbox APIs safely.
They're time-based,
which is important because you can say,
I would like something to
happen X seconds from now,
or I would like something to happen
on a frequency of every half second,
and not worry about ticks
or anything like that.
It's all nice human-based time.
And a nice side effect is that the
code stays with the implementation.
You register an event timer with a
UPP that calls back into your code.
So your timer activities can stay
with the rest of your implementation.
It keeps everything
simple and easy to code.
Primers are important with
respect to performance because
The event loop is going
to do everything for you.
So from your point of view,
there's no continuous checks to see
if it's time for you to do something,
do an animation or do
something for the user.
There's no wasted time watching
for and processing null events.
It eliminates all of that
time in the overhead entirely,
so you don't have to worry about it.
There are three kinds of timers.
There's a one-shot timer.
You just set it and later it occurs
and your callback happens once.
There's a periodic timer.
You set it.
After a while, you get a callback.
And then periodically afterwards,
with a regular frequency,
your timer callback will get called.
and there's a new kind of timer
in Jaguar called an idle timer.
What an idle timer is,
I'll go into in detail in a second.
So like I said, a one-shot timer,
it fires once.
You set up a duration
when you first create it,
say, you know,
I want to be called in two seconds or so.
After it fires,
it doesn't get destroyed or
removed from the timer loop,
from the event loop.
Its duration is just set to forever,
so the next time it's going
to happen is forever from now.
What you can do is reset it
to refire at a later time.
And, say you set a duration and
you change your mind before...
That callback is called.
You can chicken out or delay it
so that it happens at a later
time and cancel it entirely.
A good example of that
would be a dialogue.
Say it comes up and no user
interaction happens for a while.
You want to say,
I want this to go away after two minutes.
You can just automatically
make it go away using a timer.
Periodic timer is very
similar to one-shot timer.
It happens, you set a duration and your
callback gets called once
after the duration you specify.
But then after that,
it gets called back again
at specific intervals.
And you can set the interval
to any time you want.
Like the one-shot timer,
it can be delayed or
cancelled before you,
before it actually gets executed.
You have complete control over that.
And a good example of this,
and maybe even a little known fact,
is that we use timers everywhere in
the toolbox where there's animation.
So when you see a pulsing button,
not throbbing,
you see the chasing arrows, or, you know,
the
There's another one.
Progress Bar.
I had to eliminate that one because
I say Progress Bar and nobody
knows what I'm talking about.
And lastly, the new kind of timer in
Jaguar called an idle timer.
These you set to fire a certain duration
after the user becomes inactive.
And what that means is when the
user stops moving the mouse around,
or stops clicking the mouse,
or stops touching the keyboard.
Like the other two,
it can be delayed or canceled
before it gets called back.
A good example of this would
be type ahead in a search
field or something like that.
You might not want to process all
the events the second the user types.
You might want to wait.
You might have a huge database.
It might be a spell checker
lookup or something like that.
You might want to make sure they're
good and settled on the letters
they've typed and they've pressed
backspace enough times like I would.
Another good example
would be input validation.
You want to make sure what
they have in a text edit field,
for example,
is what they're going to type before
you validate whether it's good or bad
instead of doing it over and over.
So let's just have a look
at what the APIs look like.
Making a one-shot timer
is fairly straightforward.
You call the API,
install event loop timer.
The second parameter here,
10 times k event duration second,
specifies the first time
that it's going to fire.
So 10 seconds from this point,
my timer callback UPP is
going to be called.
The third parameter, zero,
just fire once,
is what makes this a one-shot timer.
So it's gonna fire once,
and then it doesn't have
a refiring frequency.
That's what's used to
make a periodic timer.
It's the exact same API.
In this case,
I used the same first fire time,
10 times k event duration second.
But you'll see the third
highlighted parameter,
2 times k event duration second.
That's the frequency with which
it will be called back after
the first time it's called.
and Idle Timer has its own API.
We couldn't recycle those other
ones because it's a special kind.
It's called Install Idle Timer.
But all of the parameters are the same.
You'll see the second parameter
is the first fire time again.
And there's even a third parameter,
and the Idle Timer can be called with
a frequency after it first starts.
Just a little bit more
on event loop timers.
There's a couple more
APIs that are important.
Like I said with the one-shot timer,
after it fires, it does not go away.
And you can reuse it afterwards.
So what you can do is set event
loop timer next fire time.
What happens with that is the
time gets set and it's just like
the first time you installed it.
This is also the way that you can
delay any of the timer callbacks.
Lastly, if you want to remove an
event loop timer entirely,
that's the API.
We always have our creative names,
like Guy says.
So I'd like to ask Curt Rothert,
another engineer on the
High Level Toolbox team,
to come up and give us a demo.
Curt?
Thank you, David.
So it's great that you can move
your application up to Mac OS X,
but it's more important that you
be a good citizen on the system.
It's really important
in terms of performance.
One thing that I typically would do when
I'd write a wait-next-event application
is I would be lazy or not want to
necessarily calculate the sleep time
necessary when I need to be called back.
And so if you saw the session 203
on migrating to Carbon events,
I was really trying to push home
to get off of wait-next-event for
your null event idle processing.
So what can you do instead?
Well,
timers are an excellent way of doing it.
I just want to demonstrate.
I don't always believe everything that
I hear until I actually see it in action.
So I just wanted to demonstrate
what's going on here.
So, I have this application and
I'm using WaitNext Event with
a sleep timeout of zero.
Because I may not know when
I want to be called back or
I need to do some calculations.
There's some overhead
associated with that.
Like I get the current
tick counts and I say,
"Ooh, I want to be called back in a third
of a second or so." And so I add
the appropriate ticks to that.
And then I wait and check with
WaitNext Event and see if it's the
appropriate time to update my animation.
So first,
since this is a performance session,
I want to bring up CPU Monitor.
So you can see how the CPU is.
I'm sitting idle right now.
Now I'm just sitting waiting next
event with a timeout of zero,
which is spinning on the processor.
It's consuming every resource
that the computer has.
I mean, if you put this in perspective,
your laptop would be
burning your legs right now.
Which is just not a very
good user experience.
In addition, I've heard the argument that
I want my application to be as
responsive as possible for the user.
Well, that's fine,
but your computer is not responding,
and in subtle ways
you're becoming a less,
you're making a less happy user
because they're downloading the
background or maybe they're ripping a
CD and it's going to be going slower.
So the solution is to
use event loop timers.
I mean, that's pretty dramatic.
All I need to do is update this image
one third-- every third of a second.
And you can see that the CPU is
hardly utilized at that point.
Now let's see what's
going on in the code.
So in the case where I'm
using Wait Next Event,
I'm just defining the tick delay
to be one-third of a second.
Or since there's 60 ticks per second,
I'm just dividing that by three.
[Transcript missing]
and when I idle,
I just call this one function
and all it does is it updates
the image that you saw.
Now, this is what I'm doing when
I'm idling with WaitNextEvent.
Now, this was a mildly contrived example.
If you're just doing
one simple animation,
you're not necessarily going to sit
on WaitNextEvent with a zero timeout.
But it's important to
demonstrate because,
as I said,
I have heard the argument that I want
my app to be as responsive as possible.
So you can see I'm sitting
on WaitNextEvent spinning,
and then I'm doing a calculation
to see if this is the appropriate
time to update my animation,
and then I idle, and then I recalculate.
Well, instead of doing that,
It's very simple to do in order
to idle with event loop timers.
You just create your event loop timer.
In this case,
I'm not waiting because I want
it to call back immediately.
My delay is 1/3 of a second,
like you saw defined above.
and then I can still continue
to sit on wait next event.
But this time,
I've made the timeout much longer.
The events are coming in.
The idle is happening at the same
frequency using a different method.
And you can see from my
example that the CPU is hardly
being utilized at that point.
So next,
I would like to show you a simple
demonstration about idle timers.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm
going to bring up an application,
and as long as you're responding or
you're interacting with the application,
the application will stay awake.
But we're going to install an idle timer,
so when the user becomes
quiet and doesn't do anything,
something interesting is going to happen.
and many of you have probably seen Guy.
And the whole point of this exercise
is to keep him awake because he's
pretty tired after preparing for WWDC.
So we can poke him, you know,
startle him.
Oh, he's pretty scared.
Or we can even do the stare down.
It's important we can
discuss his pastimes.
He's really into hockey and Canada.
I don't know why.
Let's have a conversation with him.
But the interesting part is
when we don't do anything,
he's really tired and he goes to sleep.
So let's see that again.
As long as we're active with them,
things are fine.
We can poke them, we can scare them,
prod them.
[Transcript missing]
So we've set the timeout
to be five seconds.
Pretty simple to do.
We declare our callback.
This is where we install
our idle event timer.
And as David mentioned, the parameters,
you're installing it on the current
event loop with our timeout.
And then after that,
we don't want to call back,
so the duration is forever.
and when our callback is called,
after that five second duration,
we make Guy go to sleep.
It's quite simple and the performance
improvements using event loop timers
are considerable since you're not
sitting on one entry point polling the
hardware for no actions essentially.
David?
Thanks, Curt.
So that's a good example of how
you can gain performance by not
polling continuously for null events.
And if you're not going to do this,
I encourage you to buy one of
those leather laptop protectors
so you don't burn your legs.
That's a good point, Curt.
Next I'd like to talk about
mouse tracking regions.
This is another area where
you can gain some performance.
What do I mean by mouse tracking regions?
What I mean is generally people
want to track the mouse around in
a window or such in an application.
and it will behave differently depending
on where it's pointing in a window.
You might want to change the cursor
or display status for different
pieces or even change the behavior
of the application entirely depending
on where the mouse is pointing.
The way you could do this with
OS X when we shipped it was to
install a K event mouse moved handler.
So you'd watch where the mouse went
every time and you'd get an event every
single time wherever the mouse was.
You might not have cared where the
mouse was unless it was pretty close
to the important place for you.
So there's too many mouse moved events,
and it's kind of expensive to process the
ones that you don't really care about.
A new feature on Jaguar
are mouse tracking regions,
and I encourage you to use those instead.
What you can do is register
different hot regions in your window.
Then, you get callbacks that track
entry and exit of the regions.
What that means is you get
a Carbon event that says,
you get one Carbon event that says,
the mouse just entered your region.
You get one Carbon event that means
the mouse just exited your region.
So now you can ignore
the mouse mood events,
and by extension,
if nobody else is worried
about mouse mood events,
the toolbox underneath you can stop
worrying about mouse mood events.
This has got a nice side effect
in that we don't have to call
back to the Windows server,
and there's some additional underlying
performance gain for you as well.
Another good side effect is this can work
on inactive windows in the background.
We have a demo.
Maybe Curt will show that in the demo.
So there's a huge performance
gain because you're not processing
so many mouse mood events.
When could you use them?
Like I said,
you might want to change the cursor
as you move it over different regions.
You know,
where you have a pencil when you're on
a doodle area or something like that.
When the mouse leaves the window,
maybe with some widget rollover
to change an image or a title.
You might notice in the document
window as you move the mouse over
the control buttons up in the corner,
the close box, the collapse box,
and the zoom box, that they change image.
We use mouse tracking regions for that.
It was a hidden API that we
were testing before Jaguar,
and now we're exposing it for you to use.
And again, status tracking.
A good example of that would
be in Internet Explorer when
you hold the mouse over a link.
It changes the status on the bottom,
tells you where you're about to click to.
So how do you use mouse tracking regions?
It's very simple.
At the top,
I declare a mouse tracking region ID,
and I put in my own signature
and my own region ID number.
You want to use those because it
uniquely identifies your region.
You don't want to do things
or respond to other regions.
Afterwards, you use the
Create Mouse Tracking Region API,
passing in that region
ID that you created above.
Now, there's some extra information
like which window it was in,
what the region you're worried about is.
You can have complex regions
rather than just rectangles.
What the clip is and some options.
But the important one is your
region ID because you're going
to use that later to make sure
you're tracking the right region.
Afterwards,
you just install a Carbon event handler
and you register for some events.
And you continue on and your
target will be notified so
you'll get the Carbon events.
The events you get are K event mouse
entered and K event mouse exited.
One event on each action.
So you're not getting a
whole bunch of events,
you're just getting them one at a time.
Some other important mouse tracking APIs.
Release Mouse Tracking Region.
If you're not tracking an area anymore,
you can disable it,
but it's better to deallocate it
entirely and free up resources.
You want to be able to get mouse
tracking region ID so you can check
to see that the region you're acting
on is the one that's important to you.
There's a couple of APIs to change
and move the mouse tracking region.
And an important one is to set mouse
tracking region enabled with a true
or false Boolean to indicate whether
or not you actually want to track.
So you can temporarily turn them
off or temporarily turn them on.
It's very useful.
So I mentioned the region ID and
being important to make sure
you're acting on the right region.
When you get the mouse entered
or mouse exited events,
As a parameter,
you get the mouse tracking region
reference to indicate which mouse
tracking region is being acted upon.
And what you can do is extract the region
ID from that track graph and compare
it to your signatures to make sure,
your signature and your ID,
to make sure that's the
one that you care about.
Now you really might want to
do KMouseMoved event handling.
Say you're moving the mouse around
and you want to make a graphic
underneath and know every point.
But you don't need it
for the whole window,
you just need it for one area.
What I would recommend in that case
is to use mouse tracking regions and
then when the mouse enters your region,
install the mouse moved handlers
and start paying attention
to the mouse moved events.
And if the mouse moves out
of your tracking region,
then uninstall those handlers.
And only track the mouse moved events
for that one small area that you care
about and not for the whole window.
So I'd like to ask Curt to come
back up again and give another demo,
this time on mouse tracking regions.
Curt?
Thanks, David.
So this is just to demonstrate--well,
traditionally,
you would use WaitNext Event,
like the mouse region,
to figure out where the mouse is--if
the mouse has exited a region.
But the limitation with using
WaitNext Event is that you can only
have one region per application,
and then there's some overhead
on your part to determine,
okay, once I've exited,
I need to reset that region.
Well, using Carbon Events,
you could have installed
a mouse move handler,
and David just went through all the
performance implications of that.
And I'd just like to
demonstrate that as well.
So here again we have Guy,
who's our demo guy.
And you can see that as I move
the mouse into the window,
we're getting mouse moved events.
In fact,
it might be interesting to look at
the CPU monitor while we do this.
[Transcript missing]
"Even when we're in this region,
we continue to get events.
Exit, we can say, 'Hey, how you doing?'"
You can see we're just
accumulating events.
We're not even interested in them.
We're only interested in it when the
mouse is over a particular region.
Using Mass Tracking Regions,
that's what we get.
You can see I'm moving in the window,
nothing's happening.
We're not getting any events,
there's nothing to process.
The only time we get an event is when we
have entered a region or exited a region.
You can see, two as opposed to 1100
is a pretty big savings.
Again, let's go look at the code
and see how that was done.
Did you note that 6, just a 6?
That's a pretty low number.
So again, we just have a region ID,
which we populated with
the tracking box signature.
And in this particular case,
we've associated that with the control,
so we're just going to use the
same control ID that we've used.
Then we go ahead and we create
the mouse tracking region.
Specifying the window that that
region's gonna be bound to.
The Control Region that
we're interested in.
We can even clip that
complex region if we want to,
but we don't want to in
this particular case.
The Options Standard,
that means that it's going to be
a local region to that window.
The Region ID,
some of our own window data,
so when we get the event,
we can extract some information.
Initially, in this window,
we've disabled them.
Well then later on we go ahead
and enable them when I selected
that item from the menu.
We go ahead and we
install for these events.
This is the K event class mouse,
K event mouse entered,
and K event mouse exited events.
And when we get those events,
we just tickle the event counter,
which you saw on the bottom,
and then we go ahead and update
the highlight of that image.
And of course, when we're done,
we release the mouse tracking region.
So you can see that it was very
simple to install a region,
and we get some considerable
performance gains by not listening
to each mouse moved event.
That really is just a lot when you're not
interested in anything except for this.
David?
Thanks, Curt.
Thank you.
So hopefully the choice between
processing hundreds and hundreds
of events versus six is an
easy one for you to make.
Mousetracking regions are also
very convenient and easy to use.
Next,
I'd like to talk about Carbon events,
but from a different point of view,
viewing them as notifications.
It's sort of an overlooked
feature of Carbon events.
Toolbox actually sends many,
many of these.
If you look through carbonevents.h,
there's a really good source of
information for determining what kind
of Carbon events are available to you.
They're just Carbon events that you can
easily watch for these notifications.
And there's not really a big how-to
session I can give on how to use them.
Just register for the Carbon event,
and you'll just get the one event that
is interesting to you as a notification.
Some examples are when
your window becomes hidden,
when your application becomes hidden,
Warning that your menu
is about to populate.
These are really good notifications
and you can use them to your benefit
to increase your performance.
And, instead of checking continuously
to see if something has happened,
getting a notification just
once is a lot better for you.
Here's a quick example.
I've declared an event list of a couple
of events that I'm interested in.
In this case, the volume mounted and
the volume unmounted.
You don't have to--in this case,
we want to not care about the
volume list and check this
continuously to see if it's changed.
We just want to install an
application event handler to receive
the K event volume mounted or
the K event volume unmounted events,
which will notify us when the volume
has been mounted or unmounted.
It's a lot better than polling,
wouldn't you say?
That's really all I have to
say about the notifications,
but you should really
check carbonevents.h.
Next, tracking loops.
What I mean by tracking loops is keeping
track of the mouse while you do things,
whether the mouse button is down
or the key modifiers have changed.
Traditionally,
the way to do this was to call
still down or button in tight loops.
It's very, very expensive on OS X.
They hoard the CPU entirely.
Check out that CPU meter over there.
It's pegged.
What you want to do instead
is use a tracking loop.
You want to call track mouse
location or track mouse region.
You're not calling it a tight loop.
It blocks entirely and will only return
when something important has happened.
Nice part about that is you
won't get a rainbow cursor.
Now, a lot of people view the
rainbow cursor as a bad thing,
but it's actually a feature of the
OS that indicates to the user that an
application has become unresponsive.
And the way...
Getting a rainbow cursor and working
around it is not really the solution.
What you want to do is solve the
problem that is alerting you too.
Nice side effect,
when you call track mouse
location and it blocks entirely,
it's calling the event
loop and timers fire.
But the best part is that
it frees the CPU entirely.
Notice it's a lot different
here with the mouse button down.
How do you use Track Mouse Location?
It's very simple.
You just call the API with
a couple of parameters,
one being the tracking result.
You can call it in a loop because it's
not going to come back to you many,
many times.
It'll only come back to you
when interesting things happen,
like whether the mouse is down
or whether the mouse is up.
That's all you have to do.
and Curt's going to come up and give
one more demo showing the difference in
performance using trackmost location.
Thanks, David.
You're welcome.
So in this particular case,
what I've done is I've written
a new drawing application.
And so it's very important for me
to get the location of the mouse
and actually track that mouse and
see what's going on with the user.
So initially,
I went ahead and I implemented that
using while still down git mouse,
which I found was extremely inefficient.
And I just wanted to show you
the difference in performance.
This is my groovy new
drawing application.
It's very, very cool.
So let's use-- I'm going to use--
WaitNextEvent in this particular case,
and I'm just going to--
The demonstration is definitely just
to show you while still down GitMouse.
I'm going to click the mouse button,
and we're going to see that
the CPU is completely pegged.
I'm not doing anything.
Here, I go ahead and I draw.
While doing this, the CPU is pegged.
Now let's say I implement some
groovy new feature in here.
Where this application can actually
look at what I'm drawing and do some
image processing while I'm going on.
So I'm going to want to show the
user that something's happening,
so his head's going to rotate,
similar to my first demo.
So see, I'm going to do something and
he's going to start moving around.
Well, the second I click the mouse down,
he stops.
We're in this really tight loop,
and we're not letting any other
events happen in this particular case.
Pegging the CPU.
Okay, let's go ahead and use
Track Mouse Location.
I'm gonna click the mouse down,
and we see that nothing's happening.
I go ahead and I can draw.
Nothing is happening with this CPU.
We're not consuming resources.
It's taken away from other applications
that are currently running on our system.
And as David was mentioning,
it's pretty nice because
timers will continue to fire.
You can still see that the animation
is continuing even while I draw.
So that provides a better
user experience to the user.
It's allowing it to get
into the event loop,
and it's blocked when I'm
not doing anything extra.
So let's go take a look at
the code for that as well.
So initially,
you can see that I was just calling
this simple loop while still down,
getMouse.
And I do a few calculations
to see if the mouse has moved,
and then I actually draw
a line if that's happened.
And this does not do anything other than
pull the mouse and see what's going on.
And as I mentioned in session 203,
what you're doing here while
sitting in this tight loop,
it consumes resources initially, yes,
but when we call getMouse,
that requires interprocess communication
with the Windows Server too,
which can be expensive.
It's just not necessary to sit in a tight
loop if the user's not doing anything.
In contrast,
we can still sit in a loop in
this particular case by calling--
while sitting in a while loop,
but instead use track mouse location.
In that particular call,
it will block in the CPU.
There's nothing going on
unless the mouse is moved.
If the mouse state has changed
because it's moved or the
mouse button has been released.
And then we'll go ahead and we'll
do the same thing until-- as
the mouse is dragged and we'll
exit when the mouse says comma.
So you can see that
that's really important.
It was such a small change
that we needed to make,
and we were able to dramatically
decrease our CPU usage.
David?
Thanks, Curt.
So if anything from these three demos,
you can see that you probably want to
keep the CPU meter up and keep an eye
on to see how your application is using
the resources that are available to it.
If it's using all of them and
you're not doing something really,
really crazily cool,
then you probably want to go
visit a few pieces of your code.
And you can see that it's very simple
to replace it with a timer or a track
mouse region or track mouse location,
or mouse tracking regions
or track mouse location.
Next,
I'd like to convince you guys to stop
calling find window and tight loops.
Historically,
people have called find window and find
control and those associated calls.
When you got an event to try and
figure out where events occurred,
you had to go back to
the start button and
Unfortunately, FindWindow has to call
the Windows server.
There's a bit of a performance
hit with that because there's
inter-process communication.
And really, all the information you need
is in your Carbon event.
So you really want to avoid
calling FindWinnow because it's
not really a necessary call.
For example, the mouse down Carbon event.
That's probably a pretty common
one that most of us would
register and want to see.
Once we receive that event,
we're probably concerned which
window this was occurring in.
And it's right there in the
kEventParamDirect object.
Or where the mouse location is.
You can see it there.
Or even what the keyboard modifiers are.
And if there was a control in the
window that was being clicked,
that'll show up as a control
ref in the parameter list.
So you don't need to call anything
other than the extractors for
the Carbon event parameters.
Here's another example.
This is a Carbon event that you
might use if you're writing a
custom control of some sort.
When you're writing that,
you're probably interested in what
happens when the mouse gets clicked
and when you're going to track.
You're interested in which control ref,
what the control ref is.
You're again interested
in the mouse location,
the keyboard modifiers.
You might even be interested in
which control part was clicked.
And it's all right there
in the Carbon event.
Event avail is another call
that can be inefficient when
you call it in tight loops.
Historically, developers have used it to
figure out what the state
[Transcript missing]
The Event Queue is thread safe,
so there's some
synchronization costs as well.
An Event Avail runs the event
loop and fires the timers.
It can also flush the windows.
and Fire the Timers.
So you really want to avoid
calling EventAvail if you're
just trying to figure out a few
different little parameters.
And I'll show you some other ways
that you can grab that information.
You can check the loop with
some APIs that we've introduced,
get GlobalMouse,
and get current key modifiers.
Those have been there for a while.
They don't check the event queue.
However, they do call the Windows server.
So this is a little bit better solution.
Much better than using
EventAvail by any means.
Even better than that, and new in Jaguar,
there's two APIs,
GetCurrentEventButtonState and
GetCurrentEventKeyboardModifiers.
What happens here is,
as we pop an event off the queue,
we keep track of that information
so that you can access it quickly.
And we just restore that information.
and we can send it back to you
without pulling the Windows server
so there's no performance costs.
Or very low, anyway.
Another time when you might be checking
the event queue in that fashion is
to determine if the user's canceled.
You're looking for a command period
or a click on a cancel button.
We have a conveniently named API,
Check Event Queue for User Cancel.
Very descriptive, imaginative,
like Guy says.
That's the kind of APIs you need.
It doesn't call the event loop,
and the toolbox can check this
faster than using those other calls.
And if that's all you're interested in,
then Check Event Queue for
User Counsel is the API for you.
The ultimate thing to do though,
like I mentioned earlier,
is to check the Carbon event parameter
list for the Carbon event that you have.
Because the information
might already be there.
The Carbon event often
includes modifiers.
It often includes the mouse location.
Back to my control track
Carbon event parameter list.
You can see that they're right there.
And that's probably the information
you're going to be looking for.
So those are really the key
areas I wanted to cover as far
as Carbon event performance.
And you've seen over the
course of the day many new
Carbon events have been mentioned.
So there's a whole bunch
of other new Carbon events.
and in case anybody's frantically
scribbling these down,
you might want to grab those ones too.
I could keep doing this a few more times
because there's been a lot of new events.
This is the way we're going forward.
We're always going to be
adding to the Carbon events
and adding to the Carbon event
parameters that are available.
What you want to do is keep
in tune with Carbonevents.h.
It's definitely the best documented
area in all of the high-level toolbox.
Whenever we add an event,
we document it fully.
Whenever we add a parameter,
And if you do find that
particular documentation lacking,
be sure to give us that feedback because
this area is very important to us.
So I'd like to go on to some
additional performance tips,
as I mentioned in the introduction.
These are things that have come up based
on questions from the Carbon Dev mailing
list and other sources where there's
some niggling performance problems
where people are having trouble.
So we've just compiled a few
tips that we think are helpful,
sort of the big bang for a small effort.
I have some in the Control Manager,
just a couple, some in the Menu Manager,
and I have three quick drawing
tips that might be helpful to you.
First, the control manager.
The controls we draw are fairly complex.
Drawing Aqua is not always easy,
so redrawing can be a little slow.
We make them perform as well as we can,
but when you modify them,
It can force a redraw.
Really a good example of this is if you
add many items to a pop-up button's menu.
You do that over and over.
It does some calculations
based on the size of the menu
items that you're adding,
and it might force a
redraw of that button.
Redrawing that button over and over
can definitely be a performance hit.
What you want to do under these
types of circumstances is use
the API set control visibility.
What you can do with this API is
temporarily hide a control
before you start changing it.
You can change it many times.
And then once you're done,
use set control visibility
again and show it afterwards.
So it will only redraw once at most.
So here's an example of that.
How to make control changes
a little more speedy.
You can see the first call at the top,
set control visibility.
I tell the control not to draw.
In this particular example,
it's back to that pop-up control again.
I'm adding a bunch of menu items.
So I have a loop of, say, I don't know,
too many menu items going
into a pop-up control.
I do that.
When I'm finished,
I call set control visibility again.
with True to tell it to draw again.
And at most,
I'll only redraw that control once.
It's a lot better than
drawing it menu items times.
That's what I have for
the Control Manager.
Next, the Menu Manager.
One of the key areas with the
Menu Manager where you can gain
some performance is try to avoid
invalidating the menu key cache.
Because it forces a
rebuild of the whole thing,
and that can be expensive.
What is the menu key cache?
The menu key cache is an internal
set of data that we keep so
that we can determine how to map
keyboard shortcuts onto menu items.
We have to keep that up to date,
so if any keyboard input comes in,
we know to route it to you through
the menus and perhaps as a command ID.
So what are the things that
invalidate the menu key cache?
Will you change a menu item's
modifiers or the shortcut key?
If you insert or delete menus,
if you add new menus that
have command keys on them,
definitely will do that.
If you clear the menu bar
or set a whole new one,
it has to go through the whole menu bar.
Or if you change any of the submenus,
it invalidates it because it has to
become aware of those new submenus.
So how can you avoid this?
Don't invalidate it.
And that's easy to say,
but how do you catch that?
How do you figure out what's
invalidating your menu key cache?
Here's what I would do.
I'd run my application
using GDB and attach to it,
or run it from the command line.
and David Levy will be here to talk
about the new features of Carbon Events.
Now, if you're doing this before Jaguar,
there's no underscore before
invalidate menu key cache,
something we added in Jaguar.
But that is the API you want to break on.
Now, I know there's a couple of
Code Warrior developers here,
so I'll go through the
GDB session a little bit.
Like I said,
you attach or you run from the
command line with GDB and you break on
underscore and validate menu key cache.
And you continue on.
And you use your application
until you hit that break point.
Once you hit that break point,
that's our internal notification API
and David L.
L.
Just who the culprit was.
In this case, someone's changing the item
command of a menu item.
So you can use GDB to
try and eliminate those.
Find points and maybe find out why
you were doing that and see if you
can avoid doing it at that point.
Next with the menu manager,
using the K event update
command status event,
When you receive that,
you want to use enable items wisely.
When you get this event,
it doesn't necessarily mean, oh, geez,
the whole menu's gone bad and you
need to update everything and tell
us what the state of everything is.
There's parameters that come
along with that event to indicate
what the requested items are.
It's only really concerned
with a finite set of items,
maybe not the whole thing.
And if you were to do the
whole thing every time,
that's a performance hit for you.
So you want to listen to the
K event menu context parameter.
See what it says.
It's well documented in carbon-events.h.
And you really want to only update
the items that it cares about.
Lastly with the Menu Manager,
use set menu item data instead
of making multiple calls
to other set menu foo APIs.
The cost here is that when you
call any of the menu setter APIs,
we have to map the menu ref and the
menu item index onto some internal data
structures within the menu manager,
and that can be expensive.
It's something we need to do,
but we shouldn't do it
more often than we need to.
So here's an example of a little
bit slower way of doing it.
I'm calling a set item foo API,
or set menu item foo API, three times.
And you'll notice each of these
APIs has a menu and an item parameter.
So every time there's a
menu and an item parameter,
we have to map them,
this is a menu ref and a menu item index,
onto our internal data structures.
So we're doing it three times there.
A better way for you to do it
[Transcript missing]
We set the command key field,
the key modifiers field,
and the command ID fields
All at once in the record.
And then you see at the bottom,
set menu item data.
We just call it API once.
We're only going to map the menu
ref and the menu item index onto
the internal data structures once.
So aside from initializing the record,
which is pretty fast,
this code's going to be three
times as fast as the other one.
And who knows how many times
you're calling those other -- you
might be setting every possible
thing you can for the menu item.
You'd have to map it every time.
This way, you do it all in one go.
It's the best way to do it.
On to Quick Draw.
Tip 1: Quick Draw Flush Port Buffer.
Some people here might have
familiarized themselves with this.
This API flushes the
Quick Draw Port Buffer and people
might use it to try and get their
[Transcript missing]
And you definitely don't want
to call it more often than the
screen's actually going to update.
You'll be updating the buffers faster
than the system is updating the buffers,
and this is all a waste of time.
and you definitely don't want
to call it unnecessarily.
In fact, you might not have to call it at
all because it might get flushed
automatically and that type of
flushing might be good enough for you.
Quick Draw Tip #2:
Complex Quick Draw Drawing.
You might be drawing something
with Quick Draw and drawing
thousands and thousands of lines.
I think I saw someone with
an example like that on the
Carbon Development List recently.
What you want to do here,
and what the performance problem is,
is that every time Quick Draw draws,
it's calculating its dirty region.
So when you say you're
drawing a bunch of lines,
every time it's checking to see
if the region of that line is
intersecting with the dirty region.
What you can do is just dirty the region
as a big rectangle of where you're
going to draw before you start to draw.
By using the API qd
add_rect to dirty_region.
What this does,
when you actually do your drawing,
say you're drawing a line,
the region calculation to see if
that line intersects the rectangle
that you've already set as the
dirty region is a very simple
calculation and can happen very fast,
rather than comparing
two complex regions.
Make sure it covers your drawing area,
and then the dirty region
calculations become simple,
and this will definitely
improve the speed of your code.
One caveat, though,
is that you don't want to ignore
the existing dirty region.
Make sure you use this API,
qdadrect to dirty region.
There's another one that ends
in set dirty region that ignores
the existing dirty region,
so anything that was dirty
won't get flushed properly.
And my last quick draw tip.
Again, before you do a large number
of drawing operations,
consider using locked
port bits on your port,
but only if your drawing
time is very short,
less than a second or so.
If you leave that port lock too long,
the behaviors become a little
bit unpredictable and you
might have some redraw issues.
And definitely if you use that call,
don't forget to unlock the
port bits when you're finished.
Because your drawing will definitely
have problems if you don't do that.
I'm far from being a QuickDraw expert.
I'm not on the QuickDraw team.
So I would recommend if you're
interested in QuickDraw performance
to go to session 516 on Friday,
QuickDraw Performance.
There's a QuickDraw engineer there
that will give an extended set of
performance tips for QuickDraw.
As far as performance documentation goes,
I would really recommend that you read
the OS X performance documentation.
It has some great tips in there
for how to isolate and identify
which areas of your applications are
causing you performance problems.
I'd also recommend rereading
the Handling Carbon Events and
Carbon Events Manager Reference
documentation.
We've said many things today
in reference to Carbon events.
Some of it might seem new to you,
but some of it has been in
there for quite a while.
And you definitely want to keep fresh
on there and understand what's in there.
I would even recommend
reading carbonevents.h every
time there's a release,
because it's definitely going to
become fuller and have more events,
better documentation in the future.
So in summary, use timers instead of
continuous pooling tracking.
Use mouse tracking regions instead
of mouse-moved event handlers.
Pay attention to the notifications that
are available to you as Carbon events.
And use tracking loops with track mouse
location or track mouse region instead
of still down or button down tight loops.
And please stop calling find window
and event avail in tight loops.
A Roadmap.
Unfortunately, or fortunately,
maybe you've been to all of these,
there's been a bunch of
great sessions at WWDC.
There's Ed's sessions this morning,
the Architectural Overview
and Introducing HIV,
Guy's session, and there was also
Curt's session yesterday,
Migrating to Carbon Events.
I recommend that you watch
all of those on the DVDs.
That's it for me.
We'll have Zavia come up.